---
layout: post
title:  "JSON Web Token (JWT)"
date:   2024-03-14 19:41:42 +0530
categories: Technical
---

**JSON Web Token (JWT)**

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is easily redable and is commonly used to exchange data between web application and server. Its an alternative to the XML standard which can be used for same purpose. 

So what does JSON Web Token (JWT) mean?

It is a compact, URL-safe means of representing claims to be transferred between two parties. The claims in a JWT are encoded as a JSON object that is digitally signed using a secret or a public/private key pair. URL safe means the JWT can be incluided in URL if its needed. JWT is Base64uri encoded which means it conatins characters that can be part of URL only.

JWT token consists of three parts.

1. Header (algorithm used to sign JWT, such as HMAC or RSA. and the type). 
2. Payload (details about claims).Claims are statements about an entity (typically, the user) and additional data.
3. Signature (a hash value is created after concatenating the base64url encoded values  of header and payload with a dot charater.. If the algorithm is HMAC against a secret the resultant has value is signed. If the algorithm is RSA, private key is used to sign the resultant hash)

JWT has thh following format after base64url encoding is applied on header, payload and signature.

header.payload.signature (base64url encoded values sepearted with a dot character)


**How to create JWT token?**

Depends on language there might be free programming library which you could use. If you are using Java one of the popular library is Nimbus JOSE+JWT. 

JWS (JSON Web Signature) is a standard for digitally signing JSON data. JWTs can be digitally signed using JWS to ensure their integrity and authenticity.

JWE (JSON Web Encryption) can be used when a digitally signed JWT token's payload needs to be encrypted, to add protection for the data in payload.

**View JWT**

There are online sites like https://jwt.io which helps to see the content of JWT. However, please be aware that JWT is to be kept confidential in some cases and if its not confidential only use in online site. This depends on the purpose of it. 

**What is Digital Signature**

Digial Signature is done on electronic documents or transactions to verify the authenticity and integrity of the content and the identity of the signer.

In the case of JWT, the base64Url encoded value of header and payload is hashed with a hasking alogorith after being concatenated heaer and payload with a dot character. The resultant hash value (signature) is then digitally signed using private key in the case of RSA  or a secret in the case of HMAC. The resultant signature is encoded with base64url and combiled with header.payload at the end after appendng a dot charcater.

The hash algorfithm used in JWT is specified in the header part of JWT.

**Verifying JWT token**

Its important to verify the received JWT to verify that its not tampered and sent by the intended issuer. In the case of asymmetric keys such as RSA, the corresponding public key received from the JWT issuer is used for this purpose. The hash value is regenerated after concatenating header and payload with a dot character and compared with the decrypted part of signature. If the hash values are same, we could be sure the JWT is not tampered.

Additionally, recommeded to do check like, expiration time of JWT , targeted audience ete. 
